Gotta bring up his thing.
Bring your hands. Uh, James, please. Um,
Honorable James, give us good afternoon, Mr.
Chair, colleagues. Very weird being down this end
of the table, but I'll give him my best crack.
He's my very first submission to a select committee, so,
um, do treat gently.
Uh, you've got my, your, my, um, WR submissions,
so I won't reverse, uh, in, in too much detail.
There are, I think I raised, um, a,
a few points just from my perspective, both as Chair
of the Justice Committee, where we sat through quite, uh,
an intense piece of legislation.
Uh, I made that point, uh, on the, on the front page, um,
around the purposes of the committee scrutiny.
We've also made some comments in my submission around
conduct of members during committees
and expectations around attendance at select committees.
The, are sort of the three key
points in the written submission.
And I thought I'd raise, um, just some
key comments on those, and then move on
to some other thoughts I've had, having watched
and read a number of other submissions just
around the process for, um, scrutiny of legislation.
I think we've come to a point,
and I particularly experienced this during the principles
of the Treaty Wang bill, um, where the, the volume
of submissions on, um, you know,
whether they are controversial pieces of legislation
or, um, even quite standard bits
of legislation these days are quite significant.
And that has had an impact in
how I think select committees are able to deal with them
and process them to the point where,
I think I made a comment in the submission around, um,
risking getting a, to a situation where you've got
AI generated submissions being read by AI machines
to provide summaries into a report which is drafted by ai.
And I don't know if that's a, that's a realistic outcome.
It might be taking things to the extreme end,
but certainly the volume of submissions that came
through in that process.
And then if you look at some of the other bills
that have gone through, and just the sheer quantity of, um,
very short, concise online submissions
has made the administration of it quite difficult.
And I think that leads to the point where, um, my view
of the select committee process is that it's supposed
to be about scrutinizing the quality of the legislation,
improving it as much as possible,
pointing out unintended consequences, uh,
rather than be a platform for, um, advocacy
or your voice as to whether or not a
policy is the right thing to do or not.
There is always obviously a room for that,
but I, I fear that we go too far down the pathway of, um,
treating it as a poll or a referendum
and getting away from discerning
what are some high quality submissions
that are actually gonna impact
and change the legislation
to improve it as much as possible.
Um, because of course, the, as legislators, we are there
to try and get the best quality legislation regardless
of whether or not we agree with the substance.
So that's the thrust of the first part of my submission.
The second was around conduct at select committees
and just the difficulty.
Um, and,
and I, I felt as chair that, um, I had
with maintaining order sometimes given the
tools that are available.
I think on the whole, as a committee, we,
we did a pretty good job
and we're relatively collegial the whole time.
But I think you run into issues under the current rules
when, and I I'm not gonna get into particular details
or individuals, although I gave an example in my written
submission when the normal political constraints on, uh,
behavioral conduct, um, don't hold
because the, the purpose is to provocate
and to, um, create attention and to create disorder.
And whether that's, um, deliberate
or not, the, the,
the current controls really are political controls by saying
that, well, um, if we point out this behavior,
they'll reign themselves in because there'll be a political
consequence when that is part of the reason
for the behavior or the conduct.
I think that doesn't hold, um, much strength anymore.
So I wonder whether or not there is anything the committee
needs to look at in terms of strengthening
powers available to the chair.
I'm, I'm, I haven't made any suggestions as to what
that might look like, but I think if you're, if you're, uh,
in an environment where the performance is the purpose
and you don't care about the consequences,
it can become difficult.
The third key point, I think, in my submission was just
to generally around attendance through select committees.
And here I did make some recommendations as to what, um,
standing orders, uh, review could look at.
I, I feel like the main thing is
to have some consistency across select committees as to
what the expectations are around attendance.
I feel like if we're going to, um, hold the,
particularly the submissions process as being a,
a significant part of our legislative process, I think it,
it deserves a bit more, um, manner
or respect beyond submitters turning up to an empty room
and steering at TV screens.
I, I understand that is maybe a consequence of
how we all operate these days,
particularly if you're holding hearings and recess weeks.
But I, I would feel this is submitted very disappointed
if I turn up to a room.
Yeah. And there was, um, um, you know,
there was administrative staff
and all the mps were on the screen,
and so I think having some expectations around attendance,
um, particularly during sitting weeks,
particularly when you are in the building,
I think you should have a very good reason if you are in the
building not to be attending.
And so I've made some recommendations around that as well.
And just finally having watched a number of submissions
and, um, and read, uh, a good number of submissions too,
I wanted to raise some wider comments just around
some issues that have been raised.
I contributed to the National Party submission,
and I made some, um, suggestions around the, the,
the hours of parliament.
And so my, if, if you get a chance
to look at the National Party submission, my views were
around, um, essentially running recess weeks
and Parliament weeks, um, extending the length
of time you sit during a week, increasing the amount
of time we have for scrutiny and,
and for legislation to eventually reduce the amount
of urgency that's used,
but also create a, a clear distinction between, um,
time you can spend out of Parliament in the electorate
and the time you spend in Parliament.
I was in Europe visiting the European, uh, commission
and European Parliament,
and they have what they call Strassburg weeks, which is, um,
every so often there will be a sitting in Strassburg.
And essentially it is, um, the, the entire population of,
um, parliament in Brussels essentially moves to Strasbourg
for a week, and that is where they spend their time.
And I think that's not a bad principle saying, um,
if you've got a sitting week, it is a sitting week,
and if you've got a recess week, it is a recess week.
And you can distinguish between the both.
And the proposal I put forward, um,
what's in the National Party submission, um,
could result in both more time to legislate,
but also more time at home
and less disruption for schedules.
So I think that's worth looking at.
It also, uh,
recommends maybe reducing the hours you spend legislating
into the night so that both staff
and mps can have somewhat more of a normal,
um, work life balance.
Um, I think it's difficult
to get quality representation when, um, you are working
through to 10, 10 30 at night, and then you're up at 5 36.
Um, trying to, to add value to a select committee, uh,
when you've been pretty much going nonstop.
I think there, there's a bit
of balance that could be reached there.
And just with time running out, I want to make a couple
comments just on some minor issues.
Um, one was around legislative statements.
Um, I understand the purpose of them.
I'm not sure they've achieved, um,
what they were set out to achieve.
The purpose was to provide legislative statement at the
introduction, or first reading, sorry, of a bill
and second reading so that, um,
ministers essentially didn't even read out
their first or second reading speeches.
I don't think it's achieved that.
And I wonder whether or not there is any value
in continuing on with them.
Um, if all they are is providing a one page summary
of the bill for a minister to then read out their speech,
I'm not sure if it's, it's worth keeping on.
Um, I made some points around, um, general debate
and special debates that have been raised.
I, I, I think the purpose of parliament is to legislate
and there are other platforms with which you can,
um, make political speeches.
I think in it around question time, I made some comments
around, um, probably not, probably not appreciated
by whether or not you're in government.
If you're in government, the idea of having slightly, um,
more intense scrutiny and less ability
to promote government policies, um,
might not fall favor when you're in government.
But I think it's important that question time is
for scrutiny of the executive.
Um, so I've made some suggestions around there about how
that might change, but particularly in the,
in the National Party one.
Yeah, there's some, um, sort of summary comments around
how you might change question time
to put more scrutiny on the executive while still allowing
members of the governing parties the ability to question
'cause they are, you know, mps in their own right.
Um, the one thing I didn't put in there,
which I think it would be worth raising,
perhaps it was in there, was I actually think
that question time would operate better if, um,
if there was more. Sorry,
No mps there.
Well, that would be entirely in the hands of the speaker.
I think he's been incredibly restrained
over the past wee while.
Um, and look, I understand this back and back
and forth between opposition on this,
but if, if the discretion of whether
or not a question was an order
or an answer was given was entirely up to the speaker,
and, um, if there was more supplementaries available,
the opposition could, um, could point out a non-answer
through repetitive questioning in the same, um, style,
same substance for that non answerer to be repeated.
And then they can use that as an example
of a minister not quite addressing
or approaching the question rather than sometimes we get
to a back and forth, um,
where people are challenging
essentially the rulings of the speaker.
And it, it does disrupt the, the flow of question time,
I think a little bit, but that's not the,
the point I'm particularly, um, gonna die in a ditch over.
And then finally, just to comment on committee,
the whole house stage, I actually
think it works relatively well.
I think you wouldn't need much change in the way of
specific times for ministers to speak
or limits or anything like that.
I think what might help the flow
and, um, the, the, the, um,
I guess the, the frustrations
that the opposition have on members day
and that government members have on normal days
with the dragging out
of committee stages is if there's more focus on relevance
and repetition, you might get better quality questions
and better quality debates, um, without, um, you know,
having to put the presiding officer in a position
of making calls over closing a debate quite early
because someone's gone on for two
or three minutes about some titles
that are clearly frivolous.
So I think you wouldn't need
to change the committee the whole stage,
but some more focus on relevance
and repetition could sharpen up the questions
and sharpen up the debate without diminishing the fact that,
um, you know, if these are being held during urgency,
there is more scope to be given.
I think more latitude
to the presiding officer would be good.
That's really the summary of it.
Well, James, thank you. I think you,
that's a very good submission that you've given yourself.
You've raised a number of things that we should look at.
I think you'll, um, appreciate that there are a number
of things in your submission
that were also mentioned last week.
Yes. Uh, when you were here, um, observing just on the issue
of, um, speaker discretion around, um, questions.
The questions are approved each day by the speaker
and are knocked out, but not in order.
Uh, and when it comes to supplementaries, the
long standard practice, which we may need to look at
to be more prescriptive on, is that if there is something
that comes up in an answer, uh, that expands the, the scope
of the question, then other supplementaries, uh, around
that become, uh, an order that becomes frustrating for both,
um, uh, both sides of the house at times I've noticed.
But, um, I do listen very intently just to
try and pick those things up.
And sometimes it's just one word, word that gets missed.
Um, but that one word is a huge contextual effect.
So, um, it's just me justifying my,
No, and I, I think I actually, my my view on that is
that I think a lot of the frustrations from
the opposition comes from fact.
They've got limited numbers of, so I worked in opposition
and we were responsible for allocating out supplementaries.
And by the time you give a generous allocation
to leader opposition, you know, as a,
as a back bench opposition mp, you might have three
or four subs that you can follow up
The actual may, the actual, um, the actual,
uh, allocation of question.
It's to you, well, it, it, um, under Jonathan Hunt,
it changed to, um, I prescribed this kind of a formula.
Um, and I I did make that statement
to the house the other day that I would be treating it much
more, uh, in line with standing orders, which,
because pre speaker yeah, I haven't done that to any,
I've only done that twice but far.
And, um, I personally think
that there should be some agreement around that, uh,
because the time doesn't necessarily belong to,
uh, one side or the other.
But it is, as you point out,
a very valuable time for opposition.
An important part of the accountability.
I think, um, uh, you know, if you,
if you look in the last parliament, the government
of the day, uh, had six questions, if not seven every day,
which was, um, you know, pretty frustrating
for opposition. But, you know,
And like, and likewise, when I worked in opposition, um,
I think the National Party at 56 mps at
that point, so I had Yep.
Had the vast majority of the questions in a
plethora of supplementaries.
I, I think what happens is that when you get limited
with the, the amount of supplementaries you have been
allocated or, or may
or think you may have, you fight for every single one
to make sure you get an answer
or the question addressed out of everyone.
If there were more supplementaries
or more time, perhaps you wouldn't be as, um, as agitating
or, or looking to the Whipple leader of the house to try
and get that question back.
So you can ask another one. You can just keep pursuing
with three or four or five.
Yeah. I should point out when I first came to Parliament,
um, uh, for then speaker
to kid allowed two supplementaries from the
person asking the question
and up up to two from Opposition party.
So we've come a long way. Yes, the account.
Thank you for your time Jones. We very much appreciate it.
And particularly hearing from a chairman who's dealt
with a pretty, um, uh,
difficult select committee at a time when things are
changing very dramatically around those submissions. Some
Of the members on a record record
Breaking Jamie, No,
don't call it record breaking, that's part of the problem.
Alright, thanks.
Oh yeah, thank you. Can I call to the table?
Sorry. It is the Wellington Community Justice.
They here, they're,
Yes, we're here via Zoom, If you can hear us.
Thank you. Right in front of me. Well done.
Um, yes. Well, thank you
for giving us the opportunity to submit.
Um, the Wellington Community Justice Project is made up
of law students, uh, from Victoria University of Wellington,
who submit on bills, um, either from a sort of law students
with far too much time on their hands perspective,
or, um, if they think that the interest of community justice
could, um, somehow be improved via, uh, some amendments, uh,
to bills or, um, to standing orders.
And so we've written this submission, Jordan
and I, um, where we essentially outline how we think,
uh, that parliament could be improved if the speaker were
given a power to, uh, be allowed to prevent the publication
of, um, certain video clips from Parliament
with a breach privilege.
Uh, on the basis that now that we're sort
of in the internet age, uh, there's a risk
that Parliament could become, uh, merely a, a platform
for the expression of views to online audiences rather than
for reason dialogue between members of Parliament.
Um, and we think that while there are obviously penalties
that can be imposed by the house upon its members
where they breach privilege, um, the inclusion
of this particular power would, um, sort
of change the incentive structures so that, uh, there's more
of a focus on, uh, engaging with the house, rather engage,
engaging with outside audiences.
Jordan, did you have anything to add,
Add, um, yeah, the, what the main, um, concern
that I'm preempting from the, um, committee today is
that obviously we've got Parliament, t tv
and you know, this, uh,
session right now is being live streamed
and anyone can access it at any time.
And that's the point of open democracy.
And we're not suggesting that be limited in any way.
Um, the only, the, what we are suggesting is that, uh,
particular mps considering they have, they tend to have a,
a platform, a social media platform,
and in some cases a very large, um, a way
to generate content is through the activities of the house
and what they can do in the house.
Um, and so we would suggest that
where there has been a clear breach of privilege, um,
and the SP speaker sees a fit that, um, we say, okay,
the individual member of Parliament should be limited from
reaping the benefits of that, of that breach and the media
and Parliament TV in its unfiltered capacity.
And the media,
and it's the traditional media in its filtered capacity
should be left to, um, share that as, as it sees fit.
Um, yeah, that's what I had to add there.
If you wanna continue, Leo,
I think you, oh, sorry.
You, you raise a a very good point.
Something that we're all very mindful of.
Um, I would point out
that the speaker at the moment can ask, uh, people
who put post, uh, material
that misrepresents what's said in Parliament, uh,
uh, to take it down.
And we've had instances of that,
and there's been cooperation on that.
And I think it's a matter of people understanding
what the bounds are, what they can and can't do.
Uh, but it, we've gotta be very careful that we don't, uh,
uh, uh,
and I suppose you'd say block modern communications that,
uh, people are using,
people are accessing news in very different ways these days.
So it's something
that we will certainly give some thought to.
Uh, 'cause it is, it is a,
I suppose it's the per performative aspect of, uh,
social media that, uh, uh, we are really talking about.
I, I, I think it is a valid concern about,
um, limiting publication.
And, you know, you want, you want audiences to engage
with parliament, and we,
and we note that concern in our submission, but we,
but we also think that, I mean, there, there's,
there's often talk about a lack of trust in institutions,
uh, and part particularly in in Parliament sometimes.
And I think that, um, if, if Parliament were to limit
the publication of, you know, particularly, uh, of,
of instances which are, which are particularly sort
of disrespectful towards the house, um, then I think
that would filter out, filter out some things that,
you know, the house considers shouldn't be happening
and, um, wouldn't allow MPS to sort of gain engagement from
that and, and profit off of it, you know?
And so it could be reported,
but perhaps in a more informative
and neutral manner rather than a look at me go, I'm, I'm,
I'm just reflecting the house and that that appeals
to my particular segment of, of the audience.
Um, I think that would be a sufficient protection.
Yeah. Look, it's a very live issue, uh, one
that we are quite awake to,
and it is useful to have your submission, um, uh,
reinforcing a view that, uh, that we need to look at it.
So thank you very much for your time this afternoon.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thanks All. Dr. Dean Knight
To committee, um, Dean Knight, professor of Law, te
aka Victoria University of Wellington,
very brief submission.
Two points, and as per my written submission,
urgency in the composition of voting select committees,
but also like to add something very briefly
that's arisen from your deliberation, that's
managing the scarce time for selectivity hearing
of submissions, especially the role of academics
and those people from knowledge institutions.
So, uh, but very brief on on each of those
first urgency, I think it's fair to say urgency
and expedited law making has become an addiction at the cost
of good governance and checks and balances.
And what is a delicate, uh, constitutional ecosystem?
A constitutional ecosystem,
which is a political constitution, which, um, has a lot
of checks and balances
exercised through the political process.
And we don't give time for that political process to,
uh, to do its work.
We don't get the checks and balances.
So urgency expedition acts like a bonfire for the,
on those checks and balances.
And that really worries me. And I think,
I think we can always take it as a given.
It's, the community has, uh, been quite, um,
activated by this.
And I don't wanna get into the pack drill of,
of who's been using it for what and things like that.
The question is how do we break it?
And so I've made the suggestions about, uh,
first the suggestion of, uh, tweaking the threshold
for urgency and using some different language
of requiring reasons for urgency, which are,
I think it suggest detailed, sufficient and proportionate.
Um, and along with the speaker's ability
to rule on the adequacy, which I think it applies
to extra ordinary urgency,
but would operate slightly differently if we had a slightly
more elevated
and precise, uh, threshold for urgency, particularly one
that talks about proportionality.
So it's not just a given.
There is has gotta be something, as, you know, very special
to, uh, uh, a reason for, um, urgency.
That's one thing. And, and, uh,
but my hobby horse is actually posten enactment review,
because I think that potentially takes away much
of the political advantage of urgency
and expedition restores.
The cost of the lost, um, uh, restores the lost public
participation that would've had to happen in select
committees if it had gone through the, um, extra process
and ensures the value of the select committee scrutiny
is, is, is preserved.
And we saw it used, uh, in the, uh,
with the government's consent
with the COVID-19 Public Health Response Act.
A number of academics made that call and it was picked up
and it was the right thing to do.
The, the question is whether we can make that obligatory
for situations where urgency has been used, where, uh,
select committee scrutiny has been, uh, circumvented
or been done under such time pressure that it is, uh,
in, in inadequate.
So I'm a big fan of that.
I think you can see the advantages of,
of keeping the political, uh, conversations going to ensure
that the government, uh, is exposed to the accountability
for those legislative measures.
The one p uh, postscript ad from the COVID-19 experience is
the product of the Posten enactment review needs
to be in the live and back in the, um, parliamentary
and political process, difficulty with the co COVID-19 one,
uh, recommendations was they came out three months later
and they just gathered dust.
So my suggestion is that if you're doing this, the,
the recommendations as lead committee can somehow come back
in as if it was a second reading or something like that.
So that the, the, the government has
to wear the political cost of, of, of, of dealing
with that swiftly.
And, and, and the idea being
that if there's really constructive select committee
comment, it would be in the government's advantage
to continue that, that vehicle through to basically pick up
what would otherwise be lost.
So that's my urgency suggestion.
Um, select committee compensate, uh, composition
and voting here.
I'm trying to square the circle between,
I think the two functions of select committee,
both legislative scrutiny and executive scrutiny.
And as it relates to legislative scrutiny,
I think we can expect relatively constructive pass passage
of government initiatives in situations
where select committees don't act as just wrecking balls
for legislative, um, uh, initiatives to require that to be
reinstated in the committee of the whole,
which I don't think is in anybody's benefit.
We want to foster that, that nonpartisan
constructive improvement of bills.
And so, uh, that legisl scrutiny, how do we,
how do we predict and preserve that
a go majority in those committees is understandable
as it relates to executive scrutiny.
I think there's more scrutiny for, say, scope for saying
that process should be opposition lead,
and a situation where you might say
that those committees should have a, um,
composition which reflects the proportions
of the non-executive members of the house.
So that's my proposition that the two have different needs
for different sort of compositions.
The capacity in a small house
with very few mps means we can't have separate committees
for those, both of those things.
Um, which I think is the practice in some
overseas, uh, jurisdiction.
I'm not a comparativist on this, but,
but that's a poss that was,
that's how it's been dealt with elsewhere.
But I've raised the question
of whether we can actually square that circle
with allowing party voting
and select committees based on different compositions,
based on the particular function
that these select committees engaged in cast by a senior mp.
Not sure quite on the practicalities,
but I think that's one way to try
and get a pragmatic way through it. But
I think the practicalities are, are serious
because there's 12 select committees.
Uh, we struggle to get enough people to, uh, fill 'em all.
Uh, the proportion of select committees is proportionate
to parliament by and large mm-hmm.
With a number, uh, being, uh, balanced select committees,
half opposition, half mm-hmm.
Uh, government. So I, I just don't think that
that's a great idea.
And we all, we're all for having greater, you know,
ability to do things.
What I would worry about that situation would be
that you could end up with, uh, bills being returned
to the house unaltered
because of the, the, um, an ability to get a, a,
a vote one way or the other.
And that, um, 'cause at the moment there,
there are some select committees
where it takes opposition votes, uh,
to get it back into parliament.
And I think, um, uh, I think we've just gotta be careful
that we don't actually end up with a process
that totally disrespects any submissions to Bill at all.
And I'm, I think I'm trying to address that by saying,
I think the way to do it is the waitings,
rather than being reflected just in the personnel who
who are on the committee, are actually carried by them as
as a card and the,
and the for legislative matters, the ordinary, uh, um, uh,
proportions of the house would apply to avoid that,
that situation of,
of Stonewall and, and those sorts of things.
But when it relates to scrutiny,
you've gotta different
composition because it's slightly different.
I mean, I'm, I'm happy just, uh, oh, no,
We, we'll certainly have a look at that.
Um, can I just close on the last, the, the, the last point
of my mate, which is the use of, uh,
the scarce time select committee,
time for submissions on bills?
I have a quibble as an academic in a more general
suggestion, um,
because the formal practices develop
that if you're an individual submitter,
you get five minutes, you're a
organization, one, you get 10 minutes.
I think the language is actually, it is five minutes
of a personal submission.
Uh, the difficulty is for, for, for
academics from knowledge
institutions, we fall between the two.
Because when I make a submission,
I don't make a submission personally.
I make a submission in the course of my employment as part
of my, the university's critical and conscience function.
Um, but
because of academic freedom, the views
that I express are my own
and not of my employer or my colleagues.
So practically what that means is when we submit our,
make our submissions like this one here, I've submitted
as Dr. Dean Knight,
but it really should be Dr. Dean Knight of Victoria,
university of Wellington.
And what that means, the cost of that is that means that,
uh, academics have only been getting five minutes on,
on some bills when organizations get 10 minutes,
been suggested to many people just invent an organization.
I'm not prepared to go there.
'cause I, you know, because I think, I think,
I think we take seriously the role that academics and, and,
and those from, um,
knowledge institutions may provide to that.
And I say that as knowledge institution,
universities have a statutory mandate, uh, to be critical
and conscience of society.
So we're actually designed to feed into process like that.
And I don't want to privilege our particular views
over others, but I think it's
Talk to, we are very aware of this problem.
Yeah. And, um, uh, it's, it's one that's grown over a number
of parliaments and the, the, one
of the problems is the volume of submissions
that you now get and the inability in outstanding orders
to do the sort of triage work that we should do, uh,
to make sure that there is, uh, uh, that those
who have expertise that are valuable can be a bit more.
Karen, thank
You Dr. Knight. I, um,
enjoyed your submission a lot.
Anyone that follows your commentary will not be
surprised at the content of it.
Um, but nevertheless, it's valuable
because of the practical solutions that it puts forward.
And there are a number that we've had to come
through along those I, and the reason that's important,
of course, is many of us can agree on the problem.
How we then move beyond that
and the current circumstances is the challenge.
So thank you for that. I just wondered if you might be able
to provide, uh, commentary
or perhaps a potential solution to the issue
that's arisen recently, which is relevant
to both your comments on urgency
and select committee in that, um,
standing order 1 9 8, allowing for a select committee chair
to call for, uh,
and propose a deadline for submissions,
essentially resulting in a earlier report back
to the house without an instruction from the house.
And how we might be able to look to prevent that happening
or, or at least clarify what and what cannot be done.
I'm not sure I, I'm not sure I want to be drawn yet on
that one where, where it sits,
but I do recognize that that is expedition
of the lawmaking process, which is generally undesirable.
Good things take time and,
and sometimes things need to be speeded up with good reason,
but it shouldn't be sped up for trifling reasons
and situations where, uh, there is increased cost.
And I think where there is situations where,
whether it's a short, whether it's urgency
that circumvents select committees,
or whether it's a situation where, you know,
select committees can't do their work,
or probably as important submitters don't have the bandwidth
and the ability to be able to make meaningful submissions
and constructive submissions.
Number of times I've, I've been invited
to make a select committee submission, you know,
on very short order notice.
You know, we're in the midst
of marking over 350 exams at the moment,
and university we're a bit quiet.
'cause there's a lot on it's, it actually takes a little bit
of, you know, uh, ability to be able
to prepare a proper and meaningful submission.
So anything that takes away from that, uh, robustness that,
that depth of the value of, uh, deliberation
and committee in conversation
with the community, I worry about.
Thank you. It j we, we, I don't ask
that for political reasons.
It's, it's literally been identified
as a loophole on standing orders
and we have an opportunity now there's term to address that.
So even that, even thoughts on that was useful.
Well, yeah. And I, and I'd, I'd,
I'd say fi i'd I'd say fix it.
Yeah. You know, and, and, and because it's not just urgency.
There are other means. And
that's why useful ling was expedition. Yeah.
Thank you. I don't want to, um, uh,
is it a really important question?
Well, I think it is. Um,
you referred to the committees getting sidetracked by things
and, and other ERs have talked about it before.
So are you referring to the theater that's sort
of showing its way through the select committees at the
moment when you talk about the sidetrack
that it's stopping the committees from doing their business
Or Other things. I'm
A, I'm a realist, you know, this, this,
these committees sit in a political environment.
I, you know, there are, there i I
I love watching select committees when they're
fire, when they're political.
I know that, you know, you're sitting there
and taking heat if you're a government, um, um,
member for initiative.
I think that's part of the politics, think it's part
of our political constitution.
But the question is maintain the balance
and the proportionality between that theater.
Theater has a role as a tech
and uh, as an expression of the degree of,
uh, sentiment in the community.
I think it's right that you sit through some of that.
We want to maintain knowledge
because I don't want say it's all about constructive, uh,
you know, sort of academic submissions on
technical stuff as well.
That's important. I should add that, that, that, that,
the point I didn't drop in in
that last point is I think there's one thing the committee
might think about is whether academic submissions
that are similar in character may be, um,
there may be caucus together.
You know, there's talk of hot, hot topic Yeah.
Or something like that where there's an hour
where half a dozen academics come together
and you actually do that deep dive in, into, you know, into
that sort of group of people.
That would be more meaningful
to me even if I had less than five minutes to say,
because professor was doing all the heavy lifting.
But you could get more out
of the system if you're a little bit more tailored
and working out what's going to be the best contribution
to our scrutiny of the measure.
But I, but I, but I also don't wanna give away that I think,
you know, theater has a civilizing effect.
Your suggestion is actually possible now. Yeah.
Not being applied. Yeah. But, uh, Dr.
Kel, thank you very much for your time. Thank you. Thanks.
Thank you. Thank you. Yeah.
Uh, we've got you Zealand law, law,
society here more screen.
I'm not fussed on the term, but the concept of Yeah. Yeah.
I think, I think we can come up with a better term.
What two? Oh, I like it. Tubing. Yeah.
Uh, hi, it's, uh, uh, Jerry Brown here.
Queenstown, Deborah, nice to see you.
And, uh, we're in your hands.
Thank you very much. And thank you very much Mr.
Speaker and members of the committee for the opportunity
to present the submission of the New Zealand Law Society.
Um, I'm a barrister
and until very recently, I was the convener
of the Law Society's Public Law Committee.
Um, but I was also a former deputy clerk.
And, um, currently I work with many small parliaments,
particularly in the Pacific on strengthening their standing
orders and developing good inclusive parliamentary
practices, um, with the Law Society submission.
I think you've received our comprehensive submission,
and I'm joined by Bruce Lyle,
and we will just cover some key points in the submission.
I'm going to cover the submission on urgency,
the truncated Select Committee process, the use
of amendment, papers,
and recommendations for post legislative scrutiny.
And Bryce is going to speak to the submission, um,
in respect of bills
and recommendations relating to the Bill of Rights Act, um,
reviews and the use of artificial intelligence
and committee procedures.
Um, we hope to leave most of our time
for questions from the committee,
but we're happy to take questions at any time as well.
Um, it's very interesting that many of the points raised
by the law society have been also raised
by other submitters.
And I think this common sharing of concern is something
that we hope that the committee will
heed and bring together.
Um, it in common with many submitters,
we've raised the issue about the increasing use of urgency
and the legislative process without a compelling rationale.
Um, we've made some recommendations
to introduce a higher threshold for urgency
and suggest that it should only be used in exceptional
circumstances, which the min should minister should specify.
And one of the issues is
that currently there are really not significant
parliamentary, um, incentives
for good lawmaking process in terms of time, which
an urgency motion, um, does not currently have to be debated
as in some other parliaments.
And we suggest that an incentive, um,
or disincentive for having urgency would be
to have a debatable motion.
I mean, if the urgency is justified,
then the debate might be short.
Um, also we suggest that there needs
to be transparency on why the general rules about select
committee consideration
or a more deliberative house process are being put
aside for urgency.
And this is something that can be fleshed out in a debate.
Alternatively, the standing orders could specify the
grounds for urgency.
This, the, the next issue, um, that
I will just briefly comment on, which is really related
to this, is a truncated select committee process in our view
that committees and submitters need adequate time
for consideration of bills.
And a truncated select committee process
can interfere with that.
Um, the standing orders
recom committee recommended in 2017 that there should be
standard timeframes for bill's consideration.
And while this is, um, has been adhered to,
sometimes increasingly these things are not followed.
And so we suggest that these timeframes, um, for example,
standard timeframe of six weeks should be incorporated in
the standing orders.
It really is so important that these things, um,
are not left to chance and have a specific rule about it.
Despite, you know, the recommendations of the former, um,
standing orders committee, the law society also
recommends limiting the use of amendment papers
that make substantive changes to a bill.
This may happen without public scrutiny
and have unintended consequences.
So we've recommended restricting the use
of such amendment papers to issues that come to light
after introduction
and referral of an amendment paper back
to a select Committee for Consideration
and Public submissions.
Um, and we, we understand that that might, if you had that
as a blanket rule, that might cause a, a significant amount
of work for committees
of All Amendment papers were referred.
So we've suggested some, um, way to triage that.
Um, and finally, um, pick my final point,
which is really picking up the comments that, um,
Dr. Dean Knight has just made, is that the Law Society has,
um, continued to suggest post legislative scrutiny.
Um, it suggested this in the last three, uh,
the last two reviews.
And so, um, I guess this is the chance for third time Lucky.
Um, really the Law Society has suggested that
post legislative scrutiny should be set out
as a requirement in the standing orders.
Yes, committees could do it, but they ba that,
but it's not a requirement.
Um, and the Law Society has suggested, um,
trigger points such as legislation passed under urgency.
And this would take away the, if you like, the advantage
of having urgency
and ensure that there is a comprehensive select committee
review of the legislation.
Um, I'd now like to hand over to Bryce,
who will address the other points in our submission.
Good evening. Um, so I'll begin with the, uh,
well, it's at paragraph 2.26
of the New Zealand Law Societies' submission improvements
to the Bill of Rights vetting process.
Um, the society's view is that while, uh,
standing order 2 6 9 has
provided a process through which the Attorney General can
signal inconsistencies to Parliament, um,
it's been largely ine in taking that next step,
which would be, uh, acting as a limit on introduction
or passing of bills, which are inconsistent with the Bill
of Rights Act, or providing a real prompt to Parliament
to address inconsistencies during the legislative process.
Um, so the law society wants to be, uh, productive and,
and look at ways in which, uh, that might be addressed.
Um, and I think the guiding principle for the Law Society is
that, um, any decision to legislate in a way
that infringes on the protected rights must be taken
after full consideration of the Attorney General's advice
and as a deliberate decision of the house,
rather than the advice, um, being perhaps a,
a box ticked in the process.
Um, there's two ways that the Law Society has suggested,
um, that these standard orders could be amended
to bolster this process.
The first is a paragraph 2.28, um,
and that's the, uh,
responsible minister providing the relevant select
committee, um, the purpose, uh,
or justification for enacting the infringing provision.
Um, and that's of course,
unless it's addressed in the regulatory impact
statement or other materials.
Um, so making that a, a requirement.
And next, and,
and I, I did hear, um, the comments on the difficulties
with, um, the number of select committees
and, um, providing members for those capacity issues.
Uh, but the Law Society has, um,
suggested following the examples in the United Kingdom
and in Australia, uh,
and establishing a select committee, um,
which would look at the consistency of the Bill
of Rights Act for all, uh, statutes
or legislation as it passes.
Um, and that committee could also undertake, um,
or help with the post legislative scrutiny of acts, um,
to ensure that they remain consistent with the Bill
of Rights Act throughout the process.
And then, um,
after the passed, so at 2.30,
we provide some relevant links to the, the two processes,
which we've looked at in the
United Kingdom and in Australia.
Um, it may be that we need to, uh,
be a bit creative and work through ways, which might be, uh,
perhaps more distinctly on and,
and cater to the difficulties with, um, capacity
for select committees.
Um, but we think that those provide a helpful
guide along the way.
Um, the second thing that I need
to address this evening is the use of AI
to analyze submissions, to select committees.
Um, obviously something that, um,
the media picked up on recently.
I think the first point that we should be clear on is
that the Law Society doesn't depose the use
of AI in that process.
Um, but it's a useful tool, uh,
but must not replace the work of the committee.
And, um, well, the, the work of humans on that committee,
um, it's also a developing tool at the moment.
And for that reason, the law society's view is that, um,
care should be taken in developing rules,
which should apply to the use of ai.
And if they prove
to be set at two stricter level at the outset, then
that can be unpicked, um, later or addressed later.
But we do say that to begin with,
rules put in place should be fairly strict and very clear.
And that goes to maintaining the, um, confidence
of the public and the select committee process.
Um, there are known risks
and inaccuracies, um, through use of ai,
and it's not clear to the society that those on committees
or those that are using AI
and committees are fully aware or briefed on those.
Um, there's not a lot of detail along, for instance, uh,
which platforms being used, what prompts are being entered,
um, and those sorts of, uh, bare minimum requirements.
And really there doesn't need to be a,
a high tech workaround for this
to have an outsized impact on select committee processes.
Uh, we've referred to a Guardian article, which points
to difficulties and, um, peer review processes
where something as simple as inserting white text inside
of a, a submission, which AI will pick up,
but a human reader won't, which says, elevate this
or pass this or give this priority, um,
could impact on the way that that's flagged up to, um,
or within panel processes.
Um, so I think the, the key things that the law society
wishes to see or would recommend is that, first of all, um,
there should be a necessity test
before AI is used at the moment.
Um, so the committee should come to the view
that it's ne necessary given, um,
inadequate time or resourcing.
Um, it should be overseen by,
and it does seem odd to keep saying this,
but a human staff member.
Um, and then really the, the rest of the recommendations go
to transparency around the use of ai.
Um, and that goes to confidence in the process, um,
but also, um, well in the immediate moment,
but also in the future.
So as this is rolled out across various committee processes,
um, there ought to be a way for, um, parliament
for media, uh, for academics
and for the public to track how this is developed,
what prompts were used, um, for detail of the process so
that it can be reviewed and lessons learned if need be.
Um, and we particularly cover that off, um,
at our paragraph 2.40.
Um, but, uh, thank you for the time.
Those were the points that I needed to raise
for the law society this evening, and I know Deborah
and I are both happy to that questions
or have a, on the issues that we've covered.
If, if you have anything to raise,
Uh, look, I'm sure members will.
Could I just, um, uh, pick up on the, uh,
comments you've made about the borrower reports from the
Auditor General and, um, so at the moment, the audit, the,
sorry, attorney General will, um, independently report
reduce a BO report often contrary to a cabinet decision
that they have been party to and are bound by.
And my concern would be that if the, uh,
attorney General was given a veto, uh,
that I think would diminish the value of the ACT itself
because ultimately, uh, you put it right into, uh,
political decision making at the moment,
at least if the government chooses to ignore aspects of the,
the Bill of Rights report, um, it's, it's known
and the, the position is known
and, uh, there's no, um, fudging
of the issue that they have in fact made a deli deliberate
decision that breaches or is considered
to breach aspects the Bill of Rights.
Uh, so I think we'd need to think very, very carefully about
how we made changes around that would wanna see
effectively the act itself become, uh, annuity
because it was just subject to political will.
No, and I, I think, um, the society is clear that, um,
we've recognized that Parliament can legislators
that see fit, um,
and wouldn't go as far to say
that the Attorney General ought to have a veto,
but it's about strengthening the processes to make sure
that there is a very clear
and articulated decision to legislate, um,
in those circumstances.
Okay. Thank you. Uh, other questions? No, yeah, sure.
Yeah. Um, thank you. It was an interesting submission.
You mentioned, um, white text, um, that,
but that is easily,
would be easily found if you have a tool to look for it.
Yes. And it's about, about knowing to look for it.
Um, and, and that's obviously, that's the,
the low tech workaround that's being discovered.
Um, and I'm sure that there are many others at play.
Um, and these are the things in the low tech world
that I think that the committee committees need to be aware
of if they're gonna be using technologies like ai, um,
and obviously there's,
there's gonna be much higher tech workarounds as well.
Um, and we're rapidly getting well over my A grade
as a humble barrister talking about the,
the tech side of things.
That's an interesting point though.
Um, and it would, you could see how it could be used
to promote, um, submissions up.
Um, and so yeah, good point. Yeah.
A lot of thinking for us to do around that. Yeah.
Uh, Deborah, I think you'll, um, obviously remember that,
um, often, uh, urgency is used by governments
because they just need more time to, to legislate.
We have moved, as you're probably aware, to, uh, the idea
that the minister moving urgency must do so
with some specificity.
Um, I, I listened to those comments, uh, having,
having once been party to the use of this particular, uh,
uh, mechanism, I now listen to those, uh, uh,
comments to the house of exclusivity and, and,
and is such a broad word.
It's very hard to actually get a, a head router,
but in the end, parliament votes for it.
So we are thinking a lot about, uh, urgency,
about creating more time, less pressure in bills.
And, uh, we'll be considering a number of things
over the next short while, just to let you know,
this process around standing orders has started a lot
earlier in the term than is usually the case, so
that we don't want to be in that last three months
before an election trying
to put together something, uh, rather horridly.
Can I thank you both for your time this afternoon,
and, uh, thanks very much appreciate the
points you've put in front of us. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you.
Um, call Professor Kelsey.
Thank You, chair in your hands.
Uh, thank you very much.
Uh, Koto, um, I, um,
and here largely in my academic capacity,
but also as someone who
over the past year has made submissions on six bills,
a number of them substantive
and four international treaties.
Um, so this reflects my experience
and my frustration, uh, in particular in
one this select committee processes
and two, the international treaty examination.
So I just want to focus on, on both of those today.
Uh, in particular, um,
at a time when in the conversations I have with people
outside academia
and policy, there seems
to be quite a significant credibility
gap facing the parliamentary process.
And a very significant sense that the crown's commitment to
tgi, um, has gone, um,
backwards in several decades.
And so I think in addressing the standing orders review,
the committee needs to have in mind this issue
of social license and credibility confronting the process
and not simply the administrative difficulties
that you might face, uh, within the house.
As I said, I, um, have done a significant number
of submissions this year, a number of them on,
um, major matters, the treat principles, bill,
regulatory standards, bill, genetic, um, uh,
gene technology bill, and so on.
Um, and those are areas in
which for my 43 years
before I retired, uh,
I had done an extensive amount of work.
It therefore is extremely frustrating when you lodge a
submission and you are asked to tick a box as
to whether you are an individual or a group.
And you know that as an individual you will be allocated
five minutes, then you appear before a select committee.
And the select committee chair appears
to be more concerned about timekeeping than about the
substantive engagement with the matters
before the committee.
And on a number of occasions, I have been told by chairs
of committee that it's a parliamentary rule
that there is five minutes for individuals and 10 minutes.
And how has that happened?
It is to the point,
I have to say, where it is a deterrent
to bother making a
substantive submission to a select committee.
And it reached its Nadia when the regulatory standards bill
submissions were happening.
I came down to Wellington at my own expense,
as I have done today, turned up to the select committee.
There was not a single MP in the room.
And I was, um, told very clearly
that I had a very, uh, limited amount of time to present,
even though I had made submissions previously on the three
iterations of that,
bill had done a Marsden grant study on it,
had written a book on it, and I had five minutes.
This does not give credibility to the processes.
I understand that there are issues about the deluge
of submissions coming
before select committees in some instances,
but I get concerned that the quantum problem
is overtaking some of the other questions
that need to be addressed.
And Dr. Knight has already talked about the need
to look at qualitative factors, uh,
in the making of submissions.
And, and I just go back to my experience
during the transpacific partnership agreement.
Um, lots and lots of submissions on that.
There was one, not the time pressure that there is now.
Two, there was a willingness on the part
of select committees to travel so
that people could actually not have the expense
of making submissions, but could be heard.
There was a grouping of submissions
that made similar points.
And people, and I'm,
I've done hot tubs in the Y Tony Tribunal.
I'm, I'm not a huge great fan of that,
but there is a way of being constructed.
I think we've decided we won't use the term hot tub.
That would be extremely good. I'm gonna continue this.
I like it. Well, of course I
said it was Queenstown, didn't I?
That's right. But, but I have to say, um, that another
of the factors why you have a very large number
of submissions is that there have been a lot
of provocative pieces of legislation
that have been put before the house.
And there is a question about what kind
of discipline governments themselves are going to adopt
if they want to find a balance between
people having a democratic
participation in qualitative decision making.
And you have had this endless stream of very short run
select committee times on very provocative legislation.
And so you should not be surprised that you have had a mass
of people wanting to have their voices heard.
And especially when going
before select committees, you are effectively being told
that the co coalition backroom deal means
that this will be legislated no matter
what is before the select committee.
Now, I realize that's not something the standing Orders
committee themselves can address,
but it is a matter of political discipline on the part
of government, um, that if you are going
to have credible parliamentary processes, you need to
earn that credibility.
The second issue, uh, which the chair will be very familiar
with from previous submissions, both to standing orders
and Foreign Affairs Defense
and Trade Committee, uh,
is the International Treaty Examination process.
Now, I have spent four decades working on these agreements.
The peremptory process of the select committees is worst,
I think with foreign affairs, defense
and trade for several reasons.
But in particular
because it's dealing with treaties that have not been
through a parliamentary process.
So it's not had that kind of scrutiny
in the development of the legislation.
So when the select committee gets the treaty,
it is effectively a done deal.
We have the secrecy that surrounds the process
unless the leaks.
So there's not been an ability of people, even myself,
who has a lot of expertise in this to prepare a submission
that goes through a 20 to 30 chapter arcane
international agree.
And when I'm dealing with trade
and investment agreements, really complex stuff,
select committees do not have that expertise.
They do not understand those agreements.
And so you need to have effective submissions that can
deconstruct them.
It's not enough to deal with implementing legislation,
because that's after the fact.
Implementing legislation often doesn't deal with many
of the key issues in those agreements.
Um, and the government, um, has a majority get them
through anyway.
The biggest problem on top of that is
that the committee becomes captive of the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
The national interest analysis that
MFA does is not independent.
It's actually a justification for what they have negotiated.
And it is not subject to any form of,
of robust independent critique.
So five minutes I'm given to give a submission
before the Foreign Affairs Defense
and Trade Committee on a 20 to 30 page, uh, chapter
free trade agreement that none
of the committee actually understands.
This is a process that has been critiqued since the mid
1990s, and in paragraph 38 of my submission,
I list a whole series of those going back to the Clark
of the House David McGee back in 1996.
These have consistently been ignored
because it doesn't suit governments to have
what happens in these treaty subject to scrutiny,
and it doesn't suit the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and trade to be accountable to anybody.
There was a trade for all advisory group that made a report
that, uh, New Zealand should adopt a system similar
to the Australian in, uh,
joint Standing Committee on treaties.
That's has expertise, has independence, is able to
secure external analysis, um,
and produces relatively robust, um, reports.
The Standing Orders Committee last
review recommended that there be a review
of the international treaty examination process.
I asked for that to be an independent review,
not one conducted by the Foreign Affairs Defense
and Trade Committee that was going
to effectively be reviewing itself.
And what I predicted would happen is actually
what did happen, the committee did not
seek independent advice on terms of reference.
It did not conduct a review.
Instead, it asked the parliamentary library, uh,
to provide a, a very short summary
that didn't provide really much information at all.
And then it asked MFA to brief it
and what was effectively a four page document
that said nothing, and then an oral briefing
that was set down for 20 minutes
after seven minutes of saying, this works perfectly well.
There's nothing to see here, nothing that's broken.
The chair of the committee said, well, we don't need
to conduct a review then.
And so this is
hugely frustrating, right?
Mm. They didn't even tell the committee,
MFA didn't even tell the committee that for two years
MFA had been conducting its own internal review
of the International treaty making process,
which it hadn't told any of the rest of us about.
It was a secret review
and produced a cabinet paper that effectively said,
let this be an incremental and pragmatic change.
That basically changed nothing.
And the cabinet paper was signed off by Minister Mata,
but never actually even presented to cabinet.
And so we still have this process that is decades old
that does not address the kind of comprehensive
and deep reaching agreements that we now have coming
before Foreign Affairs Defense
and Trade Committee with no effective scrutiny.
Now, I also was asked to present the, um, oh,
and I should say this is not as MFA said,
standard in the rest of the British Empire.
I've referred in my submission to a number
of recent reviews, the Australian reviews, um, again,
another set of reviews last year
and this year who've proposed legislation,
not standing orders to govern the international
treaty examination process.
A balanced approach that looks at the environmental,
economic, social, indigenous,
and other impacts of these agreements, uh, that provides
for greater transparency, uh, of agreements that provides
for reviews of treaties, uh, in a period of time
after their adoption.
Um, the UK House
of Lords has also done a very comprehensive review
just released in September.
Um, I've done reviews for the Kenyan parliament.
Um, this is, we are way out of kilter and it's all
because the gatekeepers in the process are not prepared
to have a review submission raises
the issues there in relation to TGI
and the absence of any effective treaty analysis
that is occurring, uh, in this treaty examination mechanism,
including national interest analysis, the kind of expertise
that the committee needs.
Some of this is being raised
before the Constitutional Kopa inquiry at the Wang Tribunal.
Uh, but some of it also, um, could be addressed
by standing orders, dealing with what has
to be international interest analysis, what needs
to be done in the independent review
that I hope this committee will conduct
of standing orders dealing with international treaties.
There are a variety of mechanisms to address that,
including bringing the Maori Affairs Committee into the
process, which the Trade for All advisory group recommended.
So there is a lot there.
This committee cannot deal with the review
of international treaties.
You need to set up an independent review
that is not captive of mfa, not captive of the government.
Those who've been involved with the international reviews
that I'm in touch with have offered to come
and brief the committee on
what has happened with those reviews.
Uh, we have a lot of material there
that can help produce a really robust process
that people can have confidence in.
Thank you.
Well, thank you very much for your submission.
I, I'm not surprised by what you were telling us.
'cause uh, you've told us those things before.
Um, can I just make a comment?
When you submitted to that bill, you came to Wellington,
there's no increase in the room.
That is something that really annoys me.
I think we've got two carried away, uh, with, um, the use
of, of, um, of, uh, electronics.
It's, it's okay for submitters, I think for convenience,
but MPS should be around the table.
They should be in Wellington where they're elected to be.
Uh, and it's a strongly that I owe, um, you,
you mentioned coalition deals too.
I think the hard thing is that we, we have now a structure
that only gets the government together if there is
some kind of coalition deal.
And so that's a very difficult one for us to do much about
as far as standing orders are concerned.
But the process that gets you to
that point is something we can look at.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and something that we will look at. Mm-hmm.
I, I agree with you that the whole process
around the scrutiny
of international treaties is, uh, it's minimal.
Absolutely minimal. Uh, most of them sit on the order paper
for the 42 days and they're gone. Uh, Tracy,
Um, sorry, I just had a quick
question and thank you for that.
Um, I'm not gonna comment on the, the treaty, um,
the treaty review process
because it's um, above my pay grade, so to speak.
Um, and I don't have any expertise in it,
but I trust what you say
and I'm hoping that it's something that we, we look at.
What I did want to comment was going back
to the original points, which I think quite, um, um,
articulated very well.
What I was thinking about, the fact
that this committee needs to just be really careful
that we don't start changing
or making changes to things that are actually the symptom
of a problem and not the problem.
There's been some examples that we've been given, um,
that on the surface sound as if they're problematic
and you only have to look through standing orders
and speakers rulings to see that there's a whole host
of things that have clearly been designed to, um,
ameliorate something or to change something.
But that thing in itself was just a, a symptom
of a another problem.
Um, and so I think
that your submission is gonna be really handy
and um, just parceling that out a little bit better as well.
'cause hence, you know, heavens forbid we go
through another stage of, of creating another layer of, um,
bandaids on something that's actually not the problem.
Yes. I actually had a little line
that I had written last night, which is that this committee
are the grownups in the house.
It is very helpful, I think, for you to be able to step
back from the partisan party issues
and look at what is causing the problems. Yeah.
Well I think just, just, sorry, just in relation
to the treatment, it was a really good example
because there was a huge number of submissions, but that was
because people didn't feel hurt
and um, then there were behavioral issues
because something spews out somewhere, doesn't it? Yep.
Just actually kind of ties in nicely to my question
and thanks for coming down and being here.
You might have heard some of the other, um, submitters.
Yeah. Obviously one of the issues has been the volume
of submissions on some bills.
What would your be, what would your view being, um,
on having a way where people could quickly,
'cause a lot of the submissions that we get are actually,
that they're just literally indicating this support
or opposition having a mechanism to kind of triage those out
so that we can actually see the ones of value would
Yeah. Uh, I
don't have a problem with that as long as people feel
that the views that are commonly expressed are
being represented.
Yeah. And I mentioned the transpacific partnership agreement
where there was a, a huge number of, of submissions,
but there was also an ability of people, uh,
because the committee traveled
and there wasn't this incredibly tight timeframe that
even if people didn't go, they knew someone who was,
who did, or they could see that
and there was a confidence in the process.
Yeah. Um, but I must say as well that
when I'm looking at the Foreign Affairs Defense
and Trade Committee, and so there might be four
or five people submitting on a treaty.
So it's, it comes back to
that it's not just the quantum issue.
Um, it's that there is now this
streamlining that has overtaken. Yeah. Um,
Well, you'll be pleased to know,
as in a select committee today, where we're giving people,
we're gonna give people 20 minutes.
So, but I totally take your point.
It's just a way of finding the balance.
So yeah, people can be still acknowledge
that their view has been heard,
but it's kind of then we can get
to the real submissions at ADV value. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you Professor
Kelsey, I don't have a question.
I just wanna acknowledge that five minutes is
undesirable from our perspective as well in many instances
because, um, when you have five minutes,
you want to make sure you use it.
Fair enough. Then we don't have time to ask questions.
Mm-hmm. And so often we, there's something there
that's a little gem, but it's gone.
Yes. And so I just wanted to reassure you
that we are taking it seriously.
It would be great if you could take
that thing down off the submission
page, tick the box. We'll
Look at that. Professor Kelsey,
can I thank you if you are
22 minutes with us today.
I look forward to longer when we do the review
of the international treaty process
that you recommend in your report.
Thank that. That's an instruction to the committee.
That's, uh, yeah. Thank you very much. Thank
You. Thank you. Cheers.
That was outstanding.
Ann next is online.
Uh, uh, that was that.
Yeah, we done Sorry
That that was Oh, you've done both of them? Yeah. Yes,
Yes, yes. So that was,
um, and, and I did say partway through. Yeah.
Yes, yes. But, um, yes.
And so I should say is an entity that was created out
of the Yang tribunals Y 2 5 2 2
inquiry on the transpacific partnership agreement
and a mediation agreement with the Crown.
So NATO's responsibility is to, um,
bring a Treaty of Wai lens to
what happens in the international, uh,
trade policy and agreement space.
So that's what I was referring to. Okay. That's fine.
Thank you. Uh, in that later part, it's a short submission,
but it is, um,
there will be a, a, a much more extensive submission at
RAI on the 3rd of December.
We are now is one of the
claimants in the constitutional Kopa inquiry dealing
with the treat elements
of the international treaty making process.
Uh, so that will be there.
And, and I should say I'm the only part
out involved in that entity.
I just happen to be the one who was available and down here.
Thank you very much. Appreciate that.
Uh, we now have, uh, a petition of.